# Lesson 5: Else and Elif Statements

## Index

## What is an else-statement?
---

During the last lesson, we learned about the `if` statement. The `if` statement is used to execute code if a certain condition is true. But what happens if we want something to happen if the condition is false? Well, we could go about this by creating another if statement:

```Python
my_name = "John"

if my_name == "Jeff":
    print("I know your name!")
if my_name != "Jeff":
    print("I don't know your name!")
```

That sure seems to work! But, this can get tiring and a little messy if we have a lot of if-statements. Remember that in English, we can say "If this is the case, then do this. *Otherwise* do this." In English we don't have to repeat the if statement because we used the word "otherwise!" This works the same way in Python, with the `else` statement.

Here is the previous example, but with an `else` statement:

```Python
my_name = "John"

if my_name == "Jeff":
    print("I know your name!")
else:
    print("I don't know your name!")
```

By doing this, we saved ourselves a lot of typing, and it is even easier to read! The code in the `else` statement *only* executes whenever the condition in the `if` statement is false.

Notice how just like the if-statment, the else statment must be at the same indentation level as the if, and must end with a colon, `:`. The code inside the else statment must be indented one level more than the else statement.

Often when we write code, we want to have multiple different if-statements that only execute if the first statement is false. If we try this, we get if-statements *inside* of else-statements. Which works perfectly fine!

```Python
my_name = "John"

if my_name == "Jeff":
    print("I know your name!")
else:
    if my_name == "Larry":
        print("Larry!")
    else:
        if my_name == "John":
            print("It's John!")
        else:
            print("I don't know your name!")
```

Wow that got awfully long and messy! But it works! But I would say that we would want a cleaner and easier way to write this code to do the same thing. This is where the `elif` statement comes in.

## The elif-statement
---

The `elif` statement is a really a really handy shortcut we can use in Python. It is used to execute code if the first condition is false, but the second condition is true. The keyword "elif" is short for "else if". Let's check out the long example from above, rewritten with the `elif` statement:

```Python
my_name = "John"

if my_name == "Jeff":
    print("I know your name!")
elif my_name == "Larry":
    print("Larry!")
elif my_name == "John":
    print("It's John!")
else:
    print("I don't know your name!")
```

Wow that looks a lot cleaner! The indentation is a lot cleaner. Could you imagine if we had 10 different comparisons, and wrote it the previous way? There would be so much indentation; you'd practically be writing code on the right side of your screen!

Now I want you to try and form an English sentence that makes sense out of the code above. See if you can do it on your own, and then view an example of what it might be below.

```
My name is John.

If my name is Jeff, then say "I know your name."
Otherwise, if my name is Larry, then say "Larry!"
Otherwise, if my name is John, then say "It's John!"
Otherwise, say "I don't know your name."
```

Sometimes it is easier to understand what code is doing, if you can make sense of it in English. This is one of the reasons why Python is great for beginners and experts alike. Python is considered a very "readable" language, meaning it takes less effort to understand when compared to languages like C, or Java, or many other languages.

Let's make sure that you understand the elif statement. In the following example, we will try using these statements with numbers.

```Python
my_number = 1

if my_number == 7:
    print("The number is 7.")
elif my_number == 10:
    print("The number is 10.")
elif my_number > 10:
    print("The number is greater than 10.")
elif my_number < 7:
    print("The number is less than 7.")
else:
    print("The number is between 7 and 10.")
```

Once again, let's try to make sense of this in English.

```
My number is 1.

If my number is 7, then say "The number is 7."
Otherwise, if my number is 10, then say "The number is 10."
Otherwise, if my number is greater than 10, then say "The number is greater than 10."
Otherwise, if my number is less than 7, then say "The number is less than 7."
Otherwise, say "The number is between 7 and 10."
```

Hopefully you have been able to make sense of this lesson! If you need to, go back and reread the lesson. Remember to write and execute every code example, because you learn more by doing! Now it's on to the challenge.

## Challenge
---

For this lesson's challenge, we are going to create a simple calculator that can add, subtract, multiply, and divide. The program will ask for a number, then a math operator, then another number. Then it will output the result of the math operation. Here are a few examples of what the calculator might look like. Remember the open and close braces `{}` represent example input.


### Run 1
```
Enter a number: {10}
Enter a math operator: {+}
Enter another number: {5}
10.0 + 5.0 = 15.0
```

### Run 2
```
Enter a number: {7.5}
Enter a math operator: {-}
Enter another number: {2.5}
7.5 - 2.5 = 5.0
```

### Run 3
```
Enter a number: {2}
Enter a math operator: {*}
Enter another number: {4}
2.0 * 4.0 = 8.0
```

### Run 4
```
Enter a number: {10}
Enter a math operator: {/}
Enter another number: {2}
10.0 / 2.0 = 5.0
```

### Before you begin
---
Remember how we converted the user's input into a number using `int()` in the last challenge? Since we are doing a calculator, we want to be able to handle decimal points. So this time, instead of converting the user input for the numbers into an integer, we will convert the user input into a floating point number with `float()`.

Remember to use the `elif` keyword to make it easier to read the code when necessary.

Put as much effort as you can into creating the calculator. If you just can't do it, then take a look at one of the many possible solutions below, and try to understand what it does. Write the code into your own file and run it.

[Possible solution](solution.py)

### Stretch challenge
---
Now that you've completed the calculator, find ways to improve the program!

* Perhaps add support for more than just addition, subtraction, multiplication, and division.
* Maybe you could allow the user to add more numbers to the equation.
* You could also display an error message if the user uses an operator that isn't supported.
* Also, remember that you can't divide by zero, so you might display an error message if the user picks a division operator and divides by zero.

Add to the calculator to make it your own!

## Going forward
---
If, else, and elif statements are all really useful to a Python programmer. We wouldn't be able to program the way we do if we didn't have them. They can be as simple or as complex as the situation requires. Before going on to the next lesson, consider thinking of a simple program that you can create all on your own with what you have learned so far.

You've already come a long way and you should be proud of yourself! Congratulations for sticking to it this long!

[Go to next lesson](../l6/l6.md)

[Go back to Chapter 1 page](../chapter-1.md)