# Lesson 2: Input/Output, Variables, and Comments

## Index
* TABLE OF CONTENTS


## Output
---
While we are beginning to learn Python, every program we write will be based in the command line. This means that everything we display to the user and every input we get from the user will be passed through the terminal. I know, this may seem boring, but eventually you'll see that it can still be just as fun! There is a lot more potential to the command line than you might think! For example, the command line is incredibly useful *even if* we are creating a full application!

Whenever we display information to the command line, we usually call this **printing**. Now, whenever we talk about printing, this has nothing to do with a physical printer! Instead, this means printing, or *displaying* something to the screen. In Python, this is super simple! In fact, you have already printed something to the screen before, after we set up our development environment! We did this using Python's builtin `print()` function. The print function takes in some information, called an *argument*, and displays it to the screen. We will learn more about functions and arguments at a later date, but for now you just need to know that a function is a piece of code that *does something*. Super vague, I know! But it's true!

Now let's test out the print function!

### Example
---
Alright, let's create a program to display a joke to the screen!

```Python
print("How many programmers does it take to change a lightbulb?")
print("None because that's a hardware problem!")
```

After running the code, the following should print to the screen:
```
How many programmers does it take to change a lightbulb?
None because that's a hardware problem!
```

Great! Now let's talk a little bit more about that code. First, notice how we have quotation marks in the print statements. This is because everything we type is assumed to be some sort of Python code. But we don't want Python to execute our joke as code! So we create what is called a **string**. A string is what we call a series of letters put together. A string is created by putting something between `"` or `'` marks. In some languages, the programmer is *required* to use a specific mark, but in Python, we are allowed to use whichever we want to. Throughout this guide, you will see me use double quotes most of the time. However, you may use whichever you like. What is important is to stay consistent.

Now, notice how `print` is all lowercase! Python is *case-sensitive*, meaning we can't use any capital letters in the word "print", or we will get an error!

Now that we can display information to the screen, let's talk about a more complicated topic: variables!

## Variables