# Lesson 4: Controlling Flow with If Statements

Programming is about to get really fun! We are going to learn about a way to control the flow of the program!

## What is an if-statement?
---

We use an if-statement to control what the program does based on certain conditions. In life, we use our own if-statments to make decisions. For example, if you are hungry, you will probably find something to eat. If I am tired, I will probably go to sleep. Sometimes if-statements are simple, and sometimes they can be complex, depending on the situation.

Think of it this way. If you were playing a game that **had no if statements**, using a controller or keyboard or mouse wouldn't do anything to affect the game! At that point it would just be a movie! If you want to play a game, you want to be able to *play* the game, right? Well, if statements allow for different code to be executed based on the conditions of variables, like if `controller_button_pushed` is true, then the player should jump! So let's learn how it works.

An if statement in Python starts with the `if` keyword. Following the if-statement is a condition. If the condition is true, then the code inside the if-statement will be executed. Folowing the condition, we have the `:` symbol (colon). Following the colon, we include the code that will be executed if the condition is true. In Python, all the code inside the if-statement must be indented one level more than the if-statement. Indentation can be done with a tab, or any number of spaces as long as you are consistent. But there is a common coding convention for Python, known as PEP8, that dictates that we should use 4 spaces for indentation. VS Code, along with many other editors, supports converting your tabs into spaces, so you may use the tab key to indent.

Let's take the examples used earlier, and convert them to Python code.

```Python
i_am_hungry = True

if i_am_hungry:
    print("I am hungry!")
    print("Therefore, I am going to find something to eat.")
```

```Python
i_am_tired = True

if i_am_tired:
    print("I am tired!")
    print("Therefore, I am going to go to sleep.")
```

If you execute that code, you will see that it executes all those print statements. But now try changing the values to `False` and see what happens - nothing printed!

Now let's try some examples using numbers and operators! Remember, the condition is often more than just a variable, so you can use operators right in the if-statement.

```Python
my_secret_number = 5

if my_secret_number == 5:
    print("5 is the secret number!")

if my_secret_number != 5:
    print("5 is not the secret number!")
```

We just used 2 different operators: the equality operator `==` and the inequality operator `!=`. Remember that `==` is **not** the same as `=`. We only use `=` to assign a value, not to check a value. Sometimes this is easy to forget!

Great! Now let's add some user input so that the program is interactive! We will make it a simple guessing game, where one player puts in a number, and the other player has to guess what that number is.

```Python
secret_number = input("What is your secret number? ")

guess = input("Guess what that number is: ")

if guess == secret_number:
    print("You guessed it!")
if guess != secret_number:
    print("You didn't guess it!")
```

First off, let's talk about this program. We start by asking the user for a secret number. Immediately afterward, another player guesses the number. The program then checks if they guessed it correctly. Obviously, the second player can just see the secret number on the screen, which makes it easy to guess! But this is just an example, and later on we can discuss how you might go about hiding the secret number.

Great, now you can see how the if-statement works! Now let's see if you are up for a really tough challenge!

## Challenge

For this challenge, you are going to create a program that displays a series of options for the user to choose from. The user will then be able to choose one of the options, and the program will do what the user chose.

The program will be like a bank account. You have a set starting balance, and you can view your balance, withdraw money, and deposit money. Here is an example of what the program might look like. Words within curly braces stand for user input.

### Run 1:

```
Hello! Please enter your name: {Jake}

Hello, Jake ! What would you like to do?
1. View my balance
2. Withdraw money
3. Deposit money

Enter the number for your choice: {1}

Your balance is $100 .00.
```

### Run 2:

```
Hello! Please enter your name: {Alice}

Hello, Alice ! What would you like to do?
1. View my balance
2. Withdraw money
3. Deposit money

Enter the number for your choice: {2}

Enter the amount you would like to withdraw: {50}

Your balance is now $50 .00.
```

### Run 3:

```
Hello ! Please enter your name: {Bob}

Hello, Bob! What would you like to do?
1. View my balance
2. Withdraw money
3. Deposit money

Enter the number for your choice: {3}

Enter the amount you would like to deposit: {100}

Your balance is now $200 .00.
```

### Beginning the challenge

Before you begin, here are a couple things to keep in mind:
* The balance will not save between runs. This is because after each run, the program stops, and restarts, and the balance is reset to the starting balance.
* When you get user input, it always returns a *string*. To convert the user's input into a number that you can do math with, you need to convert it to a number using the `int()` function.

If you get stuck, try reviewing this lesson or a previous lesson. Try your best! If you really just can't figure it out, that's okay! You can see an example solution below.

If you complete the program on your own, great job! Even if you had to look at the solution, you still did great! What matters is that you put effort into completing the challenge. Seeing the solution might help you understand what you are missing!

[One possible solution](res/solution.py)

### Stretch challenge

Great work on the challenge! Now go the extra mile and add to this program! Add whatever you want to add to the program, and use if-statemements so that you get used to writing them. Here are just a couple ideas that you can try:

* Make it so that the user cannot withdraw or deposite negative amounts.
* Make it so that the user cannot withdraw more than they have in their account.

## Going forward

You just learned about a really important concept in programming. Spend some time before the next lesson experimenting with if-statements, and try writing your own programs with it! When you are ready, continue on to the next lesson.

[Go to next lesson](../l5/l5.md)

[Go back to Chapter 1 page](../chapter-1.md)